# CNV-GWAS on common diseases (binary traits)
Code repository for *"Copy-number variants as modulators of common disease susceptibility"*

DOI: XX

**Contact:** Chiara Auwerx (chiara.auwerx -at- unil.ch) or Zoltan Kutalik (zoltan.kutalik -at- unil.ch).


## Workflow overview:



## Description of content: 

- **01_samples:** Selection criteria for samples used in the analyses.


- **02_probes:** Broad (non disease-specific) selection criteria for probes used in the analyses, including filtering on CNV frequency (≥ 0.01%) and pruning. This folder also contains scripts to calculate the number of effective tests used to determine the genome-wide threshold of significance after correction for multiple testing.


- **03_covariates:** Extract covariate data.


- **04_phenotypes:** Define cases and controls according to predefined inclusion and exclusion lists (see Table S1 of the manuscript) and encode the data in a PLINK-compatible format. The folder also contains scripts to estimate the prevalence of the studied diseases and determine the earliest age at diagnosis for each case.    


- **05_gwas:** Tailored common disease CNV-GWASs.
  - `01_batch_effect`: Test whether genotyping batches associate with disease risk. As associations were driven by the genotyping array and not the genotyping batch, only genotyping array was available for selection at the next step, `02_covariate_selection`. 
  - `02_covariate_selection`: For each disease, covariates among age, sex, genotyping array, and principal components (PCs) 1-40 that affect disease risk at p ≤ 0.05 are retained for inclusion in the main GWAS models.
  - `03_probe_selection`: Among pre-filtered probes (see **`02_probes`**), retain those that associate with disease risk (genotypic 2x3 Fisher test p ≤ 0.001). At least 2 diseased individuals with a probe-level CNV, duplication, or deletion are required for the probe to be tested through the mirror/U-shape, duplication-only, or deletion-only association models in the main GWAS models. 
  - `04_gwas`: GWASs according to four association models using disease- and model-specific probe and covariate combinations. The folder also contains scripts to harmonize summary statistics and retain genome-wide significant signals.
  - `05_pruning`: Prune genome-wide significant signals prior to the stepwise conditional analysis (SCA).       


- **06_SCA:** Stepwise conditional analysis (SCA) allowing to identify independent associations. 


- **07_CNVR:** Define CNV regions for each independent genome-wide significant signal from the SCA based on correlation structure in the data, in a model-specific fashion. In `combined`, signals are overlayed across models and validated with 3 statistical approaches (i.e., Fisher test, residual analysis, Cox regression (i.e., time-to-event analysis)) to define statistical confidence tiers. Unique CNV regions are identified by overlaying independent associations that map to overlapping genetic regions. 


- **08_ANNOVAR:** Annotation of unique CNV regions with genes (inc. OMIM morbid genes) and overlap with 131 continuous trait CNV-GWAS associations from [Auwerx et al., 2022](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35240056/).    


- **09_burden_analysis:** Association between various measures of the CNV burden and disease risk (inc. disease burden). This folder also contains scripts to compare the relative contribution of the deletion or duplication burdens measured in number of affected Mb, as opposed to the one measured in number of disrupted genes.   


- **10_candidates:** Scripts related to specific examples detailed in the manuscript, to obtain association data for all probes in a specified genetic region (i.e., locus zoom) or perform time-to-event analysis with specific disease definitions. 

*Note:* Scripts are ordered and often rely on data generated by previous scripts. They have been annotated to described which script produces files required for a given analysis.


## Data availability: 

Key data are made available as supplementary tables of the manuscript. Summary statistics can be downloaded from the GWAS Catalog under the study accession numbers: XX-XX.
